Gout is a form of arthritis,
which begins with the breakdown
and elimination of chemicals called purines.
Purines are naturally occurring chemicals,
which are present in the genetic material
of all the cells of your body.
They are also found in the cells
of plants and animals.
The cells in your body are constantly
dying and being replaced.
Part of this process is the breakdown
and elimination of the purines
that were in the cells.
Your body also needs to break down
and eliminate purines from foods you eat.
A small number of foods contain
high concentrations of purines.
These include shellfish and organ meats
like liver and kidneys.
Purines are broken down in several stages.
chemical waste product called uric acid.
Normally, uric acid travels through your
bloodstream to your kidneys,
to be eliminated in your urine.
But if blood levels of uric acid are too high,
needle-like crystals can form in
soft joints or tissues.
The crystals can cause the sudden, severe pain,
tenderness, and redness which are the symptoms of gout.
Treatment for gout includes
reducing uric acid levels
by avoiding foods high in purines.